:blogpost: true
:date: 2026-03-10
:author: Richard Darst
:category: work


Manifesto on university IT departments
======================================
*Alternative title: Challenging patterns with university IT for research*

This was written in 2025 and first publicly read on 12 June 2025.
It's now being released publicly.

BEGIN MANIFESTO

In my travels, I've met many people and seen one pattern: at every
university, people are upset at their (central university) IT
departments.  Why is this?  I'll argue it isn't because of the
people: individually, at my university, all the people I know in our
IT Services unit are quite competent and motivated.

I think the problem goes deeper.  Organizations have learned that IT
can become just as chaotic and unmanageable as any physical objects
can be.  Enterprise IT has adapted to treat IT like any other
infrastructure: make sure it is stable, secure, and efficient over
long-term.  Since IT is so critical and not simply something to be
thrown away if it goes wrong, IT departments must make sure that
nothing goes wrong.

Some research just needs reliable and normal IT tools to do their
work, since their work isn't about the computing.  For them, an IT
department is just what they need - it's a basic infrastructure
department like plumbing or electricity.

But for those of us for whom the computing/data/software IS the
research, it's different.  By definition, we move fast and break
things, and for us, it's the IT stuff we are pushing against.  For any
impactful thing we discover, we've iterated through many wrong paths
along the way.  By definition, we do many things wrong all the time.
We are collectively trying to enable "radical creativity" and "game
changing" using IT departments which are designed to make sure that
there is no risk of anything going wrong.  Imagine every architecture
student needing to go through city planning permission to make a model
building for a student project - it's just not appropriate given what
the project is and the risk to society!  This is what's I think is
wrong with institutional IT departments: it's not designed for the
purpose for which we are using it.  It's infrastructure, not research
support.

This doesn't work, and in fact produces the very outcome we so much
want to avoid - a bunch of researchers going wild without control,
since they have learned that asking for help doesn't actually help.
We want our IT related research to be secure and well managed.  But we
are trying to make that happen by a department which is working on a
whole other level, one that hardly shares the same language with the
researchers who so desperately need help.  The result?  The
researchers (either more actively or passively) ignore the IT
department and do their own thing.  If you had a fixed deadline for
graduating, finding your next job, or being promoted, would you not
also do the same?

Said another way, research computing is not an IT system.  Maybe
technically it is, but, it is fundamentally different.  An IT system
processes data.  A research system is a tool for a researcher who is
the prime processor.  You can spend all the time you want trying to
make the system perfect and compliant, but in the end, it's for
naught, since you've evaluated the system, and not the use of the
system.

So what to do?  It's not a problem with the IT departments.  It's not
a problem with the people within them.  They are good at what they are
supposed to do.  It's a problem with how they are being used.  We need
to recognize that an enterprise IT department is a reliable base to
build on, not a research support unit.  Our management needs to
properly separate the concerns of basic IT infrastructure and research
support.  Some do this by separate departments such as "research
computing" or a "computing center".  If they are included in the same
unit, there needs to be proper firewalling of the different concerns.
If they must stay the same, we need managements who will provide a
better mission for IT departments, and IT department leadership with
the vision to handle both halves at the same time.

We've built the worst of both worlds: computational researchers who
aren't supported, and IT research that isn't controlled or secure.  We
can do better.  In the current world, we have to do better.

END MANIFESTO
